Every year, plants,
bacteria, and algae earth wide
make around 150 billion metric tons
(165 billion tons) of food
for themselves
and almost every other living thing on earth.
How do they do it?
Photosynthesis.
In plants,
this astonishingly intricate process
takes place in a highly organized structure
called a chloroplast,
where a green pigment, chlorophyll,
and other pigments collect
and use the energy from visible light
with amazing efficiency.
In photosynthesis,
this energy is used
to do something that happens
nowhere else in the natural world
—split water into hydrogen ions
and oxygen molecules.
Hydrogen ions
combine with carbon dioxide to make sugar,
which can be used by plants to make
all the other complex molecules
that they need to grow.
Most of the oxygen
is expelled as an unused by-product,
one that we can’t live without.
About half of the oxygen
we and other organisms breathe
comes from phytoplankton,
microscopic organisms
that drift in the ocean.
And the smallest one yet discovered,
a cyanobacterium,
is also the most abundant.
Though invisible to the naked eye,
these bacteria alone
produce around one fifth
of the oxygen on earth.
Nearly all living things need oxygen,
and they depend
on other life-forms to make it.
The amazingly complex process
of combining carbon dioxide
with the water
that constantly cycles on our planet
and energy from the sun
gives us every bite of food
and every breath of air we need.
What do you think?
Did photosynthesis evolve?
Or was it designed?